---
title: Method
layout: page
permalink: /method.html
# include CollectionBuilder info at bottom
# Edit the markdown on in this file to describe your collection
# Look in _includes/feature for options to easily add features to the page
---
# Method

## Digital vs. Print Paradigm

Grounded in the principles of textual criticism, the archive has traditionally been linked to the paradigm of writing and print, premised on the idea of an original text created and published by an author. Although textual criticism challenges the image of the author as an enlightened genius—acknowledging the multiple drafts that precede the “original” published text and the existence of numerous printed variants—the idealization of authorship has nevertheless persisted. For instance, [Sylvia Molloy](https://www.liverpooluniversitypress.co.uk/doi/pdf/10.5195/reviberoamer.2000.5818) observes that the authority of the writer reemerged in the nineteenth century in the context of nation-building. During this period, certain publications and literary works were elevated as foundational by writers who positioned themselves as cultural authorities and active agents in the construction of national identity. As [Ángel Rama](https://www.dukeupress.edu/the-lettered-city) argues in *The Lettered City*, writing and written documents occupy an exclusive position in Latin American societies, acquiring an almost sacred aura. For [Diana Taylor](https://www.dukeupress.edu/the-archive-and-the-repertoire), this contributed to the conception of the archive as unalterable and resistant to manipulation, acquiring authority once it had been “selected, classified, and presented for analysis.” 

These tensions within the field of literature are further complicated by the emergence of the digital paradigm. [Patrick Sahle](https://books.openedition.org/obp/3397%20) introduces a common problem that digital artists, scholars, and creatives find when utilizing digital tools to build their works: Some genres are actually impossible to transpose to a printed medium. Literally, an 3d artist would struggle to encompass a 3d visualization in one flat 2d sheet of paper. A similar problem occurs when someone tries to print a map with multiple layers, it is easier to visualize how they juxtapose or how its metadata interact with a digital screen than with ink. That is precisely the problem faced by Digital Scholarly Editions, their text contains so much metadata that printing the text would either remove all metadata or render it an unreadable, chaotic mess. As we observe in this digital archive, this is not a problem inherent to all digital formats as some are actually made by design to be compatible with printing. These problems illustrate that this is beyond a matter of media but rather a matter of paradigm.

Most archives on the internet are often referred to as digital archives because they are hosted online. However, the medium in which they exist does not necessarily change their paradigm: Many online archives focus on posting PDF file documents of different texts and cultural productions. In fact, the PDF format is notoriously known for keeping the ratio of physical pages and not stretching or changing according to the screen of any device. This makes the format very faithful to the print paradigm, as PDFs are intentionally designed to resist change. Indeed, a PDF document is a digital file containing multiple bits, but paradigm-wise it serves so it can be used interchangeably with physical sheets of paper. 

In other words, the medium of a cultural artifact might not necessarily change the conditions to access it. PDF files are very useful in the sense that they can be printed or read online keeping the exact same ratio, but this same advantage becomes a struggle whenever users must read them on a tiny Kindle or smartphone screen. A4 sheets of paper were not meant to fit within pocket-size devices and this tension appears as PDF files resist radical changes of mediums. When rendering a PDF document, digital screens serve more as an emulator in which paper dictates their use.

Therefore, we inquire whether digital archives that only follow the print paradigm can really be “digital?” We argue that the use of “digital” begs a much broader question in terms of paradigm, not only medium. Some cultural artifacts featured in this digital archive are impossible to print, videos are the most evidence examples. However, some textual productions that although resemble zines are also incompatible with the print paradigm. This is the case of [*★ ★ ★ Proceso Espiral / Kawsayqapujllaymi ★ ★ ★*](https://alexablas.github.io/Queer-Zines-Digital-Archive/item.html?id=demonixsdelosandes1), which requires the user to explore poetic if and elses according to their decisions. This genre called “Choose Your Own Adventure” is not totally new, as many printed fantasy books and RPG manuals have explored algorithmic instructions that the readers themselves are responsible for computing. However, printing [*★ ★ ★ Proceso Espiral / Kawsayqapujllaymi ★ ★ ★*](https://alexablas.github.io/Queer-Zines-Digital-Archive/item.html?id=demonixsdelosandes1) would incur a loss of metadata that did not affect classic books of the Choose Your Own Adventure genre. Should this work be printed as a Python code? An HTML file? Or, rather, should it be printed as it is rendered on the screen?

## Zine as Repertoire

We take up the concept of repertoire to theoretical and methodologically ground the multiple layers that characterize the digital paradigm—from metadata to medium. Instead of reducing the digital paradigm to the mere presence of digital components, we highlight the bodily interaction that emerges from the interaction with it. Diana Taylor reflects on the physical interactions with the archive—which we underscore that can be either printed or digital ones—, and try to situate them in space and time. 

Over the last decades, even though the literary canon increasingly incorporated the genre of zines—preserving them in institutional archives such as in universities, public libraries, and digital repositories—the genre nevertheless remains marginal. Even in the pages of the canon, zines seem to belong to the marginalia. This is particularly sensitive when analyzing the broader publication ecosystem. Taylor is critical of how archives can reduce cultural productions, such as zines, to merely archival objects. On one hand, the archival process itself risks decontextualizing the cultural productions it preserves, detaching them from the spatial and temporal conditions of their emergence. On the other hand, this process also alienates the reader and author of the zine by severing their embodied connection to and with the object (2003, 19). 

In consonance with Taylor’s proposal, we do not seek to reify zines solely as printed publications in which the consumption through reading is the sole and ultimately purpose. As Taylor observes, zines also function as repertoire, legible through ephemeral acts such as book fairs, networks of artistic collaboration, launch performances, and other situated encounters. In other words, zines have an embodied component, a relational ephemerality. This perspective resonates with Taylor’s approach to literature and performance in Latin America. The repertoire, she argues, “enacts embodied memory” and “requires presence” (2003, 20). In contrast to the stability attributed to the archive, the practices enacted through the repertoire “do not remain the same”; rather, they “keep and transform choreographies of meaning”  (2003, 20). For this reason, our digital archive seeks to emphasize the repertoire embedded in these zines: the temporal and spatial contexts of their publication, their circulation and mapping, and their interaction within the digital paradigm.

## List of References

* Molloy, Sylvia. "La cuestión del género: propuestas olvidadas y desafíos críticos." *Revista iberoamericana* 66.193 (2000): 815-819.  
* Rama, Angel. *The lettered city*. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1996\.  
* Sahle, Patrick. “ What is a Scholarly Digital Edition?” *Digital Scholarly Editing. Theories and Practice.* Matthew James Driscoll & Elena Pierazzo (Eds.). Open Edition Books,  2016, p. 19-39. [https://books.openedition.org/obp/3397](https://books.openedition.org/obp/3397) 
* Taylor, Diana. The Archive and the Repertoire: Performing Cultural Memory in the Americas. Duke University Press, 2003\.
