---
title: Our Goal
layout: page
permalink: /ourgoal.html
# include CollectionBuilder info at bottom
# Edit the markdown on in this file to describe your collection
# Look in _includes/feature for options to easily add features to the page
---
# Our Goal
The goal of this project is to develop a digital archive considering the juxtaposed elements related to the distribution and production of queer zines, emphasizing productions from the Global South and Latin America. On the one hand, we believe that it is critical to visibilize zines from the Global South because such productions encompass marginalized experiences from colonized and Indigenous groups that are often overlooked in major archives. On the other hand, we defend that building bridges with the insurgent zine production from the Global North can serve as an exercise of solidarity and allyship, establishing a shared commitment of challenging imperialism, cis, and heteronormativity. We argue that such an effort becomes a critical intervention on how the archive can serve as a tool to erase the memory and history of marginalized communities within marginalized communities. 

Although other projects have developed a similar endeavour of serving as a repository for zines, like the projects [queer.archive.work](http://queer.archive.work), our contribution is to utilize CollectionBuilder to include temporal and spatial dimensions on how these zines were distributed and produced, utilizing metadata to interconnect different cultural productions. Other archives like the [Fanzines Argentinos](https://hdlab.space/fanzines-argentinos/) also utilize CollectionBuilder, however, the scope of the project is limited to Argentina. Furthermore, although [Fanzines Argentinos](https://hdlab.space/fanzines-argentinos/) includes queer works, this is not necessarily the focus of its curation. For that, we will consider elements like space, time, paradigm (digital, interactive, printed), and the multimodality of its distribution.

Furthermore, this project addresses challenges that other archives struggle to encompass. For example, navigating the vicissitudes between the print and digital paradigm in cultural archiving. Printed books (and zines\!) cannot be changed since once the text is published, authors and editors lose control of the text. Correcting a typo or adding a footnote might take years until a new edition is printed. Contrary to that, digital archives can undergo constant live changes and updates. However, we identify a problem with the digital archive: in comparison to the print paradigm, in the digital paradigm it is a challenge to track versions as every change means the extinction of previous versions. For example, many online publications lack the user interface to provide the reader with a transparent track of changes. For this reason, we host the framework of this digital archive on GitHub, allowing users to review detailed versioning control of all changes throughout time. In addition, we utilize Google Spreadsheets to manage the archive’s metadata, guaranteeing versioning of metadata. 

Ultimately, this project caters the needs from beginners who are enthusiasts of zines or are learning about digital archives to advanced users who can benefit from detailed versioning control and web development. 
